NEWS
0.40-6
     o	When a pomp object is updated using 'pomp', the 'params' slot will now be copied over (appropriately transformed).
     	Before, it was simply dropped.

     o	The 'gillespie.sir' example has been changed to make the reporting rate equal to 'rho'.
     	Before, it was fixed at 10%.

     o	A new error-trap has been put into 'probe' for the case nsim < nprobes.
     	Thanks to Dani Jonas for finding this error.

0.40-5
     o	More informative error messages when dimension of state space or data space disagree internally.

     o	The 'weighted' argument to 'mif' and 'continue' is now deprecated in favor of a new argument 'method'.
     	The old 'weighted=T' corresponds to 'method="mif"' while the old 'weighted=F' corresponds to 'method="unweighted"'.

0.40-4
     o	New functions 'traj.match.objfun' and 'probe.match.objfun' have been added.
     	These functions construct functions of one argument suitable for use as objective functions in 'optim'-like optimizers (iincluding 'subplex' and 'sannbox').
	Minimizing these functions solves the trajectory-matching problem and probe-matching problem, respectively.
	This allows the user much greater flexibility in choice of optimization algorithm than is afforded by 'traj.match' and 'probe.match'.

     o	The 'sannbox' optimizer, which performs simulated annealing with box constraints, is now exported and available for general use.

0.40-3
     o  The 'bsmc' method has been improved, due to the contributions of Pierre Jacob.
     	Specifically, 'bsmc' no longer reports a log-likelihood (which it never really computed anyway) but a log-evidence.
	The latter computation was supplied by Pierre Jacob.

     o	A new helper function, 'exp2geom_rate_correction' has been added to the 'pomp.h' file.
     	This function computes the rate r such that if N ~ geometric(prob=1-exp(-r*dt)) and T ~ exponential(rate=R), then E[N*dt] = E[T].
	This is useful in approximating a continuous-time death process by a discrete time (Euler) process.
	In particular, in such a case, T is the waiting time to death in the former and N*dt is the waiting time to death in the latter.
	An Euler binomial or multinomial process with rate r=exp2geom_rate_correction(R,dt) will have the same mean waiting time as the exponential process with rate R.

     o	A new helper function, 'rgammawn' has been added, with both R and C interfaces.
     	This function draws an increment of a Gamma white-noise process with a given intensity.
	Specifically, dw=rgammwn(sigma,dt) is Gamma distributed with mean dt and variance sigma^2*dt.
	In this case, mu*dw/dt is suitable for use as a random rate in an Euler-multinomial process.

0.40-2
     o  A bug to do with computation of the number of steps needed in discrete-time simulation and trajectory computations has been fixed.
     	This bug was introduced in version 0.40-1.

0.40-1
     o  It is now possible for discrete-time determistic skeletons to have a general step-size.
     	Before, the stepsize was always forced to be 1.
	The new argument 'skelmap.delta.t' in 'pomp' (default value 1) sets this step-size.
	NB: in implementing this feature, a new slot has been added to the basic 'pomp' class.
	'pomp' objects created with versions <0.40-1 will not therefore work with this version and must be re-created.

     o  The deterministic skeleton trajectory functions now look for variables named in 'zeronames' and treat these variables as accumulators.
     	This brings the behavior of the deterministic skeleton functions into line with 'rprocess'.
	A new section of the "advanced topics" vignette discusses accumulator variables and 'zeronames'.

     o	Include the user manual PDF among the vignettes.

     o	The new function 'parmat' creates a suitable matrix of parameters in one line.

0.39-5
     o	Bug fix in 'bsmc' that arises when the state space is 1-D.
     	Thanks to Arnab Bhattacharya for finding the bug.

     o	Some inconsistencies in the arguments of 'bsmc' have been fixed.

0.39-4
     o	Minor corrections to the documentation for 'spect', 'probe', and 'traj.match'.

     o  Fix infelicity in 'traj.match' and 'nlf' that arises when the 'data' slot has no rownames.
     	Rownames are not strictly required for the 'data' slot.

     o  The 'sannbox' algorithm now should work even when the objective function throws a non-finite value.
     	The behavior now is to replace non-finite values with a large number.
	This behavior follows that of the 'SANN' method in 'optim.

0.39-3
     o	The help files for 'pfilter' and 'mif' have been updated to explain how to use a variable number of particles in the particle filtering algorithm.

     o	Inside 'init.state', a check has been added to make sure that the user's initializer function returns a vector of uniform size, as per the algorithms' assumptions.
     	Thanks to Micaela Martinez-Bakker for catching this.

     o	'mif' has been modified so as to allow estimation of initial-value parameters alone via fixed-lag smoothing.

0.39-2
     o	When 'po' is a 'pomp'-class object with covariates, 'as.data.frame(po)' and 'as(po,"data.frame")' now contain columns for the covariates. 
     	The latter are interpolated, if necessary, at the observation times.

     o	Bug fix: when 'pfilter' is called with a single parameter vector supplied in the 'params' argument, these parameters are copied into the 'params' slot of the resulting 'pfilterd.pomp' object.
     	Before, this failed when the 'params' slot of the 'pomp' object was empty.
	A similar bug existed in 'traj.match' and has likewise been fixed.

     o	To eliminate warnings and confusion during package check, 'profile.design' has been replaced by 'profileDesign'.
     	For parallelism, 'slice.design' and 'sobol.design' have been replaced by 'sliceDesign' and 'sobolDesign', respectively.
     	The older forms are now deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

0.39-1
     o	New facilities for parameter transformation are provided.
     	New optional arguments 'parameter.transform' and 'parameter.inv.transform' to 'pomp' allow the user to specify transformations between natural and internal parameter scalings.
	A new option 'transfom' to 'coef' and 'coef<-' allows the user to get and set parameters on the natural scale.
	See 'pomp?coef' and the "intro_to_pomp" vignette for details and examples.
	Similarly, the 'conv.rec' method now takes an optional 'transform' argument.

     o	Minor improvements to the documentation.

0.38-5
     o	'pfilter' will now give an error if ever a non-finite likelihood (dmeasure value) is returned.
	Before, errors were only generated when dmeasure returned NA.

     o	'spect' now returns frequencies reflective of the observation times.
     	Before, the frequencies were given as fractions of the sampling frequency.

0.38-4
     o  Improvements to the documentation.

0.38-3
     o  Clarifications and minor improvements in the help pages.

0.38-2
     o  A new section describing and demonstrating nonlinear forecasting has been added to the "intro to pomp" vignette.

     o	Fixed bug in 'nlf': desire for transient period (nconverge>0) was unrecognized.

0.38-1
     o  Fixed bug in 'pomp' when 'data' is of class 'pomp': userdata should be preserved.

     o	Improved discussion of SIR model in "Intro to pomp" vignette.

     o  In 'pfilterd.pomp' objects, 'saved.states' and 'saved.params' slots are now length-ntimes lists of arrays.

     o  It is now possible to use variable numbers of particles in 'pfilter'.
     	The 'Np' argument may be specified as a single number as before, or now as either a vector of numbers or a function.

0.37-2
     o  The "advanced topics" vignette has been much augmented and improved.

     o  The 'euler.sir' example (load it with 'data(euler.sir)') has a different measurement model: a discretized normal distribution with the same mean and variance as before.

0.37-1
     o  The arguments 'skeleton.map' and 'skeleton.vectorfield' are now deprecated.
        Specify a discrete-time skeleton using 'skeleton.type="map"' and a continuous-time skeleton via 'skeleton.type="vectorfield"'.

     o  'pomp' is now a generic function.  
        Calling it on a 'pomp' object copies the object; one can optionally modify some of the slots.

     o  Two new files 'gompertz.R' and 'gompertz.c' are in the 'examples' directory.  
     	These contain codes needed to reproduce the Gompertz example in the 'intro_to_pomp' vignette.

     o  The warning messages to do with the default behaviors of 'simulate' and 'trajectory' with respect to the arguments 'times' and 't0' have been removed.
        These warnings were introduced in version 0.34-1 to alert users to changes in the default behavior of 'simulate' and 'trajectory' introduced with that version.
        See the help ("pomp?simulate", "pomp?trajectory") for details.

     o  It is now possible to save both the states and particles portions of the filtering distributions computed in 'pfilter'.
     	This is accomplished by means of the logical 'save.states' and 'save.params' arguments to 'pfilter'.
	The particles are stored in rank-3 arrays in the slots 'saved.states' and 'saved.params'.
	This results in the need for a change in the structure of 'pfilterd.pomp' objects: note that 'pfilterd.pomp' objects (including 'mif' and 'pmcmc' objects) created under pre-0.37-1 version of the package will not load under versions >= 0.37-1.

0.36-7
     o  'trajectory' now gives a more informative error when no skeleton is present

     o  'pred.mean', 'pred.var', and 'filter.mean' methods are now defined for 'pfilterd.pomp' objects (and not just 'mif' objects)

     o  A new 'data()'-loadable example is included: do '?blowflies' to read about it.

0.36-6
     o  The B-spline basis construction functions 'bspline.basis' and 'periodic.bspline.basis' now take a 'names' argument that allows one to give names to the basis functions.

0.36-5
     o  The "intro_to_pomp" vignette has been updated.  The first part of the vignette centers on a new, more transparent first example.

     o  A bug in 'pfilter' has been fixed.  This bug was introduced in version 0.32-6 (SVN revision 315).  Upon filtering failure, state variables were left un-updated.  Thanks to Karim Khader for reporting circumstances that led to the identification of this bug.

     o  There is now a method for 'loglik' on 'probed.pomp' objects.  This returns the synthetic likelihood.

     o  The box-constrained simulated annealing optimization method 'sannbox' is now an option in 'probe.match'.

     o  Calling 'states' on a pomp object having no unobserved states now fails gracefully (returning NULL rather than generating an error).

     o  The rprocess plugin 'discrete.time.sim' now takes an optional 'delta.t' argument to allow for arbitrary (but still necessarily regular) spacing of observations.  By default, delta.t=1.


0.36-1
     o  There are two new classes: 'traj.matched.pomp' and 'pfilterd.pomp' to hold the results of 'traj.match' and 'pfilter' computations, respectively.  The old classes 'mif' and 'pmcmc' now inherit from 'pfilterd.pomp' in a natural way.

     o  When 'traj.match' is called, the returned 'traj.matched.pomp' object has its 'states' slot filled with the model trajectory at the fitted parameters.

     o  More optimization methods are now provided in 'traj.match'.  These include the new algorithm "sannbox", an optionally box-constrained simulated annealing algorithm.

     o  'probe.match' is now an S4 method (like 'pfilter', 'mif', 'pmcmc', and 'traj.match') with methods for classes 'pomp', 'probed.pomp', and 'probe.matched.pomp'.

     o  There is a change to the interface to 'pfilter' in that 'save.states' results in the filling of the 'last.states' slot.  Before version 0.36-1, the 'pfilter' returned a list.  The element 'states' of that list corresponds to the slot 'last.states' in version 0.36-1.  It was necessary to make this name-change in order to avoid a conflict with the 'states' slot inherited from the 'pomp' class.

0.35-1
     o  Added a facility for computation of "synthetic likelihood" (Wood 2010) using a robust estimate of the covariance.  A new slot in objects of class 'probed.pomp' holds this value.

     o  The synthetic likelihood is now the quantity that is maximized in 'probe.match'.

     o  Added the argument 'type' to 'probe.ccf' so that either cross-covariance or cross-correlation can be returned.  'probe.ccf' and 'probe.acf' now have comparable interfaces.

     o  Changed the way that 'probe.acf' accepts lags.  Now an arbitrary set of lags can be selected.

     o  A bug in the new method 'obs' has been fixed.

     o  A protection-stack overflow bug in 'probe' has been fixed.

     o  The 'seed' slot in 'probed.pomp' and 'spect.pomp' objects has been removed, along with unwanted behavior to do with it.

0.34-2:

     o  Added a method to coerce 'probed.pomp' objects to 'data.frame' objects.

     o  Fix bug when 'simulate' is run on objects that inherit from 'pomp' but are not themselves pomps.
       'simulate' should return 'pomp' objects when obs=F and states=F, regardless of what class 'object' is.

     o  'simulate' and 'rprocess' are accelerated somewhat through judicious use of 'memcpy'.

0.34-1
     o  The default behaviors of 'simulate' and 'trajectory' with respect to the argument 'times' has changed.
        There is a new argument, 't0', which specifies the time at which the initial conditions obtain.
        The default for 't0' is 'timezero(object)'.
        The default for 'times' is now 'time(object,t0=FALSE)' (it was 'time(object,t0=TRUE)').
        This change eliminates an infelicity in which 'simulate' and 'trajectory' returned undesired values at the initial time.
        Users can ensure that their codes will continue to function as intended by specifying the values of the 'times' and 't0' arguments to these functions, thus removing dependence on the defaults. 
        To aid users in  modifying their codes, a warning is now displayed whenever a potentially affected call is made.
        These warnings will be removed in a future release.
        See the documentation ("pomp?simulate", "pomp?trajectory") for a description of the new default behaviors.

     o  The 'states' slot now holds values of the state process only at the times given in the 'times' slot.
        This is a change from the earlier behavior in which the 'states' slot sometimes included the value of the state process at 't0'.

     o  'simulate' has been re-implemented in C for speed.

     o  A new method 'obs' for pomp objects returns the contents of the 'data' slot.
        It is synonymous with 'data.array'.

     o  A banner is now displayed on package attachment.  

     o  'coef<-' now behaves like ordinary vector assignment.

     o  'probe' and 'spect' now take an argument 'params'.

     o  'probe.cov' and 'probe.cor' have been removed in favor of 'probe.acf' and 'probe.ccf'.

     o  The functions 'euler.simulate', 'onestep.simulate', and 'onestep.density', deprecated since version 0.29-1, have been removed.  
    
0.33-1
     o Major improvements in speed in the probe-matching routines have been realized by coding the computationally-intensive portions of these calculations in C.

     o New probes recommended by Simon Wood (Nature 466:1102-1104, 2010) have been implemented.
       In particular, the new function 'probe.marginal' regresses the marginal distributions of actual and simulated data against a reference distribution, returning as probes the regression coefficients.
      'probe.marginal' and 'probe.acf' have been coded in C for speed.

0.32-1
     o  pomp now includes parameter estimation methods based on probe-matching and power-spectrum-matching as explained in papers by Kendall et al. (B. E. Kendall, C. J. Briggs, W. M. Murdoch, P. Turchin, S. P. Ellner, E. McCauley, R. M. Nisbet, S. N. Wood (1999) Why do populations cycle? A synthesis of statistical and mechanistic modeling approaches.  Ecology, 80:1789--1805) and Reuman et al. (D.C. Reuman, R.A. Desharnais, R.F. Costantino, O. Ahmad, J.E. Cohen (2006) Power spectra reveal the influence of stochasticity on nonlinear population dynamics. Proc. Nat'l. Acad. Sci., U.S.A.} 103:18860--18865).

0.31-2
     o  new "window", "timezero", and "timezero<-" methods are available for manipulating 'pomp' objects.

0.31-1
     o  pomp now includes an implementation of the particle Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm of Andrieu et al. (Andrieu, C., Doucet, A., & Holenstein, R. (2010) Particle Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 72:1--33).
        This algorithm is implemented in the method 'pmcmc': see 'help(pmcmc)' for details.
	Implementation primarily due to Ed Ionides.
       
0.30-1
     o  pomp now includes an implementation of the approximate Bayesian Sequential Monte Carlo algorithm of Liu & West (Liu, J. & West, M. (2001) Combining Parameter and State Estimation in Simulation-Based Filtering. In Doucet, A.; de Freitas, N. & Gordon, N. J. (eds.) Sequential Monte Carlo Methods in Practice, Springer, New York, pp. 197--224).
       This algorithm is implemented in the method 'bsmc': see 'help(bsmc)' for details.
       Thanks to Matt Ferrari and Michael Lavine for the implementation.
       
0.29-5
     o  The cholera transmission model from King, A. A., Ionides, E. L., Pascual, M., and Bouma, M. J. (2008) Inapparent infections and cholera dynamics, Nature 454:877--880 together with data from the Dacca district of historic Bengal are now included.
        See 'help(dacca)' for details.

0.29-1
     o  This is a major revision.

     o  Big improvements to the documentation, including worked examples in vignettes and improvements to the manual pages.

     o  Encoding models is now much easier through the use of "plugin" modules.
        These are functions that write the 'rprocess' and 'dprocess' slots given minimal information on the structure of the model.

     o  A plugin for continuous-time Markov process models using the Gillespie algorithm is available.

     o  A plugin for discrete-time Markov processes is now available.

     o  Several example pomps are now loadable via the data() command.

     o  There are changes in the C interface to measurement models that are NOT BACKWARD COMPATIBLE.  
       Existing user measurement model codes will need to be modified, but these changes are minor.
       All this is fully explained in the file CHANGES_0.29-1.txt.

     o  The changes are documented in detail in the file CHANGES_0.29-1.txt.

0.22-1
     o  The nonlinear forecasting method of Kendall, Ellner, et al. is now implemented in the package.  This is an "indirect inference" method using quasi-likelihood as an objective function.

0.21-4
     o  Improved documentation in "euler.Rd".

0.21-3
     o   Trajectories of the deterministic skeleton can now be computed via the method "trajectory".

     o	Bug fix in stochastic Euler algorithm.

0.20-8
     o   Better error handling in mif

     o	Fix inaccuracy in documentation of 'pomp' arguments 'rmeasure' and 'dmeasure'

0.20-7
     o   Bug fix in convergence record storage

0.20-6
     o   Bug fix in "intro_to_pomp" vignette
    
0.20-5
     o   Better error handling and improved documentation for 'mif'

     o   Testing of examples in the 'examples' directory, including compilation, linking, and running of dynamically-loadable library on unix machines

0.20-4
     o   A bug in the Euler simulator was repaired.

     o	 The Euler simulator no longer calls GetRNGState() and PutRNGState().
     	 When a native routine is used for the Euler step, it must contain these calls.

     o	 A potential bug in the Euler-multinomial simulator was repaired.

0.20-2
     o	The lookup_table (see file 'include/pomp.h') interface for C codes has been streamlined.
        It is now slightly more straightforward to set up a 'struct lookup_table'.
    	See the examples ('include/examples').

     o	Added 'logistic.R' to the 'tests' directory.  
	This is a one-variable stochastic differential equation simulated using Euler-Maruyama.

     o	The SIR example ('examples/sir.R') now includes two pomps: one with native routines implementing rprocess, dprocess, and skeleton, the other using R files.
	The comparison may be instructive.

     o	Several bugs fixed.

0.20-1
     o   This is a major revision.

     o	The basic structure of the 'pomp' class has been changed to better support the use of native routines as well as R functions.
	In particular, the 'rmeasure', 'dmeasure', and 'skeleton' methods can now be specified either as R functions or as native routines.
	Native routines are specified by name; an optional 'PACKAGE' argument is provided to narrow the search.
	The search is done not at the time of the call to 'pomp' but at the time the function is used.

     o	Support has been added for covariates, in the form of lookup tables.
        This has been accomplished through the addition of slots 'tcovar', 'covar', and 'covarnames' to the 'pomp' class.
	'rmeasure', 'dmeasure', 'skeleton', and 'init.state' now perform lookup when covariates exist and pass this information to the user-defined function.
	'rprocess' and 'dprocess' receive the full lookup table ('tcovar' plus 'covar').

     o	'rmeasure', 'dmeasure', and 'skeleton' are now specified by a function (or native routine) that does the computation for ONE state vector and ONE parameter vector.
    	This is analogous to the way that 'init.state' has operated from the beginning.
	It greatly simplifies model specification from the user's point of view without changing the low-level methods interfaces (pomp methods 'rmeasure', 'dmeasure', 'skeleton', 'init.states').
	However, THIS CHANGE IS NOT BACKWARD-COMPATIBLE: users will need to rewrite code for the 'rmeasure', 'dmeasure', and 'skeleton' slots.
	In practice, this should not be difficult.
	It involves removing loops over 'times' and columns of 'params' and (if covariates are used in the measurement model or deterministic skeleton) making use of the 'covars' argument passed to the user function.

     o	The interface to the 'euler.simulate' and 'euler.density' facilities have changed to make them consistent with the new pomp class.

     o	The header files have been reorganized: 'include/euler.h' and 'include/lookup_table.h' have been replaced with a single 'include/pomp.h'.
    	Significant additions have been made to support the new structure of the pomp class.
	Specifically, new prototypes have been defined for native routines to implement the measurement model, the process model, and the deterministic skeleton.
